certification-process.md, before:

# Outcome statements + the Cert + APD Processes
Outcomes statements and metrics are part of the APD process and the Standardized Modular Certification process. 

## APD process 
[insert language about outcomes statements + metrics in APDs here]

## Certification process 
[insert language about outcomes statements + metrics in APDs here]

# How states can utilize this repo
States can use the Certification Repository to find examples and expectations for developing outcomes and metrics. Additionally, the repository provides a platform for states to share their outcomes and metrics with other states and see examples of what others have created. Finally, states can use the repository to suggest changes and provide feedback to CMS.

# How CMS State Officers can utilize this repo
The Certification Repository provides MES State Officers a publicly available resources to guide states when asked how to write outcome statements and measure impact and gives them an easy way to share and updates examples of outcome statements and metrics to use in their APDs and certification documents. State Officers can also use the repository to interact with states and vendors to provide feedback, baseline the outcomes and metrics they receive from states, and compare outcomes and metrics to examples and submissions from other states.

# How vendors can utilize this repo
In the past, vendors did not have direct access to the CMS required outcomes or recommended metrics and had to rely on information provided by states. This repository provides a single repository of information for outcomes and metrics vendors can directly access. In addition, vendors did not have an ability to collaborate to ensure outcomes and metrics align to the delivery of products and services. The repository facilitates good ideas from vendors being incorporated into outcomes and metrics.

Commit message:

updating process + how to use repo content

certification-process.md, after:

# Incorporating outcome statements into CMS Processes
Outcomes statements and metrics are part of the APD process and the Standardized Modular Certification process. 

## APD process 
[insert language about outcomes statements + metrics in APDs here]

## Certification process 
[insert language about outcomes statements + metrics in APDs here]

## State-specific outcomes 
States requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements and the baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes*, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

*State-Specific Outcomes* should target specific problems and derive Medicaid program benefits. 

# Utilizing this repo 
The CMS Certification Repository is a space for states, CMS, and vendors to learn, share, and contribute information about the MES Certification process and its related artifacts. 

## From this repo states can: 
- Find examples and expectations for developing outcomes and metrics
- Share outcomes and metrics with other states and see examples of what other states have created
- Suggest changes and provide feedback to CMS regaurding outcomes requirements and processes (email OutcomesRepoFeedback@hhs.cms.org)

## From this repo CMS will: 
- Provide publicly available resources to guide states in how to write outcome statements and measure impact
- Share and updated examples of outcome statements and metrics for use in their APDs and certification documents
- Baseline the outcomes and metrics received from states, and compare outcomes and metrics to examples and submissions from other states

## From this repo vendors can: 
- Get direct access to the CMS required outcomes or recommended metrics
- Share suggestions and feedback to CMS regaurding  outcomes requirements and processes (email OutcomesRepoFeedback@hhs.cms.org)
