readme.md, before:

# Welcome to the CMS Certification Repository

The CMS Certification Repository is a space for states, CMS, and vendors to learn, share, and contribute information about the MES Certification process and its related artifacts. From this site you can access the latest-and-greatest information about CMS-Required outcomes and recommended metrics as well as view CMS approved state-specific outcomes and metrics.

## Recent updates

This site is intended to be a resource that grows over time. Here are recent updates you may want to know about:

- UI bugfixes were implemented and we fixed several bugs when users tried to download CMS-Required CSVs
- All business areas/module pages were updated with CMS-Required Outcomes and recommended Metrics
- The visual styling for tables was merged to improve the look and feel of the site.
- The site was officially shared with states in the Certification Community of Practice on October 12, 2021.

[Click here to see the details for all recent changes to the site](https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification-Staging/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aclosed)

## Getting Started

### Intake Form

The Intake Form Template is used throughout the Streamlined Modular Certification process to track information about a state MES project for certification. It is tailored for each state project. States will fill out the Intake Form Template by entering the CMS-required outcomes that document compliance with regulations applicable to their project, their state-specific outcomes, and the metrics used to show that the project is achieving its outcomes on a continuous basis. 

The template here contains CMS-required E&E outcomes as an example of how content should appear in the Intake Form. A blank copy of the intake form is also available on [Medicaid.gov](https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/data-systems/certification/streamlined-modular-certification/index.html).

[Download the Intake Form](https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/main/Appendix%20E%20Intake%20Form%20Template.xlsx)

### Example Templates

- [Example Metrics Template](https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/main/Metric%20report%20example%20template.xlsx) - An example template states may use for submitting metrics data
- [Example Certification Request Letter Template](https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/main/SMC%20Certification%20Request%20Letter%20Template.docx) - An example template of the Certification Request Letter that states must submit to CMS to request certification 
- [Example Monthly Project Status Reporting Template](https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/main/Streamlined%20Modular%20Certification%20Required%20Monthly%20Project%20Status%20Report%20Example%20Template.docx) - An example template states may use to submit required monthly status reports

### Outcomes and Metrics

The Outcomes and Metrics in this repository is organized by MES business areas on the left. Certification is still required if your project does not neatly fall into one of the business areas. You may still find relevant outcomes and metrics examples across other business areas. As needed, work with your state team and State Officer to create state-specific outcomes statements.

## Contributing
The MES team will be iterating on the site over time and would love to know how it can be improved. We are also actively gathering and evaluating outcomes statements crafted by states across all business areas. If you are interested in sharing examples to be hosted on this site, send them to: <MESCertificationRepo@cms.hhs.gov>. 

If you have any other feedback or suggestions please email them to <MESCertificationRepo@cms.hhs.gov> and our team will get back to you.

Commit message:

Changed release notes on the homepage

readme.md, after:

# Welcome to the CMS Certification Repository

The CMS Certification Repository is a space for states, CMS, and vendors to learn, share, and contribute information about the MES Certification process and its related artifacts. From this site you can access the latest-and-greatest information about CMS-Required outcomes and recommended metrics as well as view CMS approved state-specific outcomes and metrics.

## Recent Updates

This site is intended to be a resource that grows over time, with quarterly major releases as needed (4 per year). We are using a standard semantic release versioning of **MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH**, which will follow this format:

- **MAJOR** version release when CMS makes significant changes such as: Adding new outcomes, rewriting existing outcomes, and adding/editing metrics, required docs, or processes.
- **MINOR** version release when CMS adds functionality to the site or contextual clarifications, but are not substantially changing any core content.
- **PATCH** version release when CMS makes minor edits such as: typo correction, bug fixes, and other minor (non-substantial) edits.

[Click here to see the latest release notes for the site](https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/releases)

## Getting Started

### Intake Form

The Intake Form Template is used throughout the Streamlined Modular Certification process to track information about a state MES project for certification. It is tailored for each state project. States will fill out the Intake Form Template by entering the CMS-required outcomes that document compliance with regulations applicable to their project, their state-specific outcomes, and the metrics used to show that the project is achieving its outcomes on a continuous basis. 

The template here contains CMS-required E&E outcomes as an example of how content should appear in the Intake Form. A blank copy of the intake form is also available on [Medicaid.gov](https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/data-systems/certification/streamlined-modular-certification/index.html).

[Download the Intake Form](https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/main/Appendix%20E%20Intake%20Form%20Template.xlsx)

### Example Templates

- [Example Metrics Template](https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/main/Metric%20report%20example%20template.xlsx) - An example template states may use for submitting metrics data
- [Example Certification Request Letter Template](https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/main/SMC%20Certification%20Request%20Letter%20Template.docx) - An example template of the Certification Request Letter that states must submit to CMS to request certification 
- [Example Monthly Project Status Reporting Template](https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/main/Streamlined%20Modular%20Certification%20Required%20Monthly%20Project%20Status%20Report%20Example%20Template.docx) - An example template states may use to submit required monthly status reports

### Outcomes and Metrics

The Outcomes and Metrics in this repository is organized by MES business areas on the left. Certification is still required if your project does not neatly fall into one of the business areas. You may still find relevant outcomes and metrics examples across other business areas. As needed, work with your state team and State Officer to create state-specific outcomes statements.

## Contributing
The MES team will be iterating on the site over time and would love to know how it can be improved. We are also actively gathering and evaluating outcomes statements crafted by states across all business areas. If you are interested in sharing examples to be hosted on this site, send them to: <MESCertificationRepo@cms.hhs.gov>. 

If you have any other feedback or suggestions please email them to <MESCertificationRepo@cms.hhs.gov> and our team will get back to you.
