Outcomes and Metrics/Encounter Processing System (EPS) & Managed Care System/readme.md, before:

# Encounter Processing System (EPS) & Managed Care System
#### How this system supports the Medicaid Program 

[intro text]

<div align="right">
  <a href="https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/NAretakis-Navigation-Flat/Outcomes%20and%20Metrics/Claims%20Processing/CMS-Required%20%26%20State%20Specific%20Outcomes.xlsx">Click here to download the outcomes in an Excel Workbook</a>  
</div>

---

### CMS-Required Outcomes

Each CMS-Required outcome is based on statutory or regulatory requirements. CMS-Required Outcomes and Metrics are used to demonstrate that a system is compliant with the applicable federal regulations which pertain to that a specific system or module. CMS-Required outcomes form the baseline for system/module functionality, which must continue to continue to receive enhanced federal funding for operations. 

| **Reference Number** | **Outcome**          | **Recommended Metrics**                                      | **Regulatory Sources**  | **Minimum Reporting Periodicity** |
| -------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------: | :-------------------------------: |
| EPS1   | The system ingests encounter data (submissions and re-submissions) from MCOs and sends quality transaction feedback back to the plans to ensure appropriate industry standard format. (Quality transaction checks include, but are not limited to: completeness, missing information, formatting, and the TR3 implementation guide business rules validations).  | - Percentage of timely encounter submissions from MCOs.  | 42 CFR 438.242 |     Quaterly     |
| EPS2   | The system ingests encounter data (submissions and re-submissions) from managed care entities in compliance with HIPAA security and privacy standards and performing quality checks for completeness and accuracy before submitting to CMS using standardized formatting, such as ASC X12N 837, NCPDP and the ASC X12N 835, as appropriate. (Quality checks include, but are not limited to completeness, character types, missing information, formatting, duplicates, and business rules validations, such as payment to dis-enrolled providers, etc.). | - Percentage state receives timely encounter re-submissions from MCOs.  | 42 CFR 438.604, 438.818, and 438.242  |     Quarterly    |
| EPS3   | The state includes submission requirements (timeliness, re-submissions, etc.), definitions, data specifications and standards, and consequences for non-compliance in its managed care contracts. The state enforces consequences for non-compliance.  | - This is a state specific requirement, for the most part, states have encounters submission/re-submission processes based on 30/60/90/180 days and 365 days.   | 42 CFR Part 438.3 |     As needed     |
| EPS4   | The state uses encounter data to calculate capitation rates and performs payment comparisons with FFS claims data. | - State can validate that solution supports capability to set and edit capitation targets – Pass/Fail<br /><br />- State can validate that solution supports the capability to flag cases where MCO payments exceed FFS upper limit – Pass/Fail | 42 CFR Part 438 |     Quarterly     |
| EPS5   | The state complies with federal reporting requirements. These include but are not necessarily limited to:<br />- T-MSIS (Transformed Medicaid Statistical Information System)<br />- CMS 416 (EPSDT)<br />- CHIPRA core set quality measures - Medi-Medi, 1115 evaluation, and<br />- CMMI demonstration evaluation reports. | - SMA submits federal reports in a timely, and agreed upon, manner – Pass/Fail<br /><br />- Reports are those currently required by applicable federal regulations, state plans, waivers etc. This include, but are not limited to: <br />-  T-MSIS (monthly)         <br />-  CMS 416 (monthly)      <br />-  CHIPRA core set (quarterly)          <br />-  CMS 37 (biannually)    <br />-  CMS 372 (semi-annually)  <br />-  CMS 64 (quarterly)   | 42 CFR 438.818, 438.242 |     Monthly <br /><br />(Timeline could be modified and should be agreed upon between CMS and the State.)      |

---

### State-Specific Outcomes - CMS Approved

*State-Specific Outcomes* focus on improvements to the Medicaid program above and beyond baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes.*

States which are requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

*State-Specific Outcomes* should target specific problems and derive Medicaid program benefits. For more information on constructing and writing *good outcomes* see our page  "Writing-Outcome-Statements". 

In the table below, we provide a listing of State-Specific Outcomes that have been approved by CMS. Each row includes: 

* The state which created the outcome and metrics and the assocaited Medicaid program goal;
* The outcome statement;
* The assocaited metric(s) linked to the outcome statement, and; 
* The periodicity for reporting metric data to CMS. 

| **State**     | Medicaid Program Goal | Outcome Statement | **Metric(s)** | **Periodicity** |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| [placeholder] | [placeholder]         | [placeholder]     | [placeholder] | [placeholder]   |
| [placeholder] | [placeholder]         | [placeholder]     | [placeholder] | [placeholder]   |

Commit message:

Updating State Outcomes language across business area pages

Outcomes and Metrics/Encounter Processing System (EPS) & Managed Care System/readme.md, after:

# Encounter Processing System (EPS) & Managed Care System
#### How this system supports the Medicaid Program 

[intro text]

<div align="right">
  <a href="https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/NAretakis-Navigation-Flat/Outcomes%20and%20Metrics/Claims%20Processing/CMS-Required%20%26%20State%20Specific%20Outcomes.xlsx">Click here to download the outcomes in an Excel Workbook</a>  
</div>

---

## CMS-Required Outcomes

Each CMS-Required outcome is based on statutory or regulatory requirements. CMS-Required Outcomes and Metrics are used to demonstrate that a system is compliant with the applicable federal regulations which pertain to that a specific system or module. CMS-Required outcomes form the baseline for system/module functionality, which must continue to continue to receive enhanced federal funding for operations. 

| **Reference Number** | **Outcome**          | **Recommended Metrics**                                      | **Regulatory Sources**  | **Minimum Reporting Periodicity** |
| -------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------: | :-------------------------------: |
| EPS1   | The system ingests encounter data (submissions and re-submissions) from MCOs and sends quality transaction feedback back to the plans to ensure appropriate industry standard format. (Quality transaction checks include, but are not limited to: completeness, missing information, formatting, and the TR3 implementation guide business rules validations).  | - Percentage of timely encounter submissions from MCOs.  | 42 CFR 438.242 |     Quaterly     |
| EPS2   | The system ingests encounter data (submissions and re-submissions) from managed care entities in compliance with HIPAA security and privacy standards and performing quality checks for completeness and accuracy before submitting to CMS using standardized formatting, such as ASC X12N 837, NCPDP and the ASC X12N 835, as appropriate. (Quality checks include, but are not limited to completeness, character types, missing information, formatting, duplicates, and business rules validations, such as payment to dis-enrolled providers, etc.). | - Percentage state receives timely encounter re-submissions from MCOs.  | 42 CFR 438.604, 438.818, and 438.242  |     Quarterly    |
| EPS3   | The state includes submission requirements (timeliness, re-submissions, etc.), definitions, data specifications and standards, and consequences for non-compliance in its managed care contracts. The state enforces consequences for non-compliance.  | - This is a state specific requirement, for the most part, states have encounters submission/re-submission processes based on 30/60/90/180 days and 365 days.   | 42 CFR Part 438.3 |     As needed     |
| EPS4   | The state uses encounter data to calculate capitation rates and performs payment comparisons with FFS claims data. | - State can validate that solution supports capability to set and edit capitation targets – Pass/Fail<br /><br />- State can validate that solution supports the capability to flag cases where MCO payments exceed FFS upper limit – Pass/Fail | 42 CFR Part 438 |     Quarterly     |
| EPS5   | The state complies with federal reporting requirements. These include but are not necessarily limited to:<br />- T-MSIS (Transformed Medicaid Statistical Information System)<br />- CMS 416 (EPSDT)<br />- CHIPRA core set quality measures - Medi-Medi, 1115 evaluation, and<br />- CMMI demonstration evaluation reports. | - SMA submits federal reports in a timely, and agreed upon, manner – Pass/Fail<br /><br />- Reports are those currently required by applicable federal regulations, state plans, waivers etc. This include, but are not limited to: <br />-  T-MSIS (monthly)         <br />-  CMS 416 (monthly)      <br />-  CHIPRA core set (quarterly)          <br />-  CMS 37 (biannually)    <br />-  CMS 372 (semi-annually)  <br />-  CMS 64 (quarterly)   | 42 CFR 438.818, 438.242 |     Monthly <br /><br />(Timeline could be modified and should be agreed upon between CMS and the State.)      |

---

## State-Specific Outcomes - CMS Approved

States requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements and the baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes*, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

When state-specific outcomes statements, keep [these tips](https://cmsgov.github.io/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/writing-outcome-statemets) in mind. 

### Examples for Encounter Processing Systems

We are actively gathering and evaluating outcomes statements crafted by states for this business area. 

If you have an example from your state for this business area that you'd like us to consider adding for this page, please send it to OutcomesRepoFeedback@hhs.cms.org.




| **State**     | Medicaid Program Goal | Outcome Statement | **Metric(s)** | **Periodicity** |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;| &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;| &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
