Outcomes and Metrics/Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP)/readme.md, before:

# Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP)
#### How this system supports the Medicaid Program 

[intro text]

<div align="right">
  <a href="https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/NAretakis-Navigation-Flat/Outcomes%20and%20Metrics/Claims%20Processing/CMS-Required%20%26%20State%20Specific%20Outcomes.xlsx">Click here to download the outcomes in an Excel Workbook</a>  
</div>

---

### CMS-Required Outcomes

Each CMS-Required outcome is based on statutory or regulatory requirements. CMS-Required Outcomes and Metrics are used to demonstrate that a system is compliant with the applicable federal regulations which pertain to that a specific system or module. CMS-Required outcomes form the baseline for system/module functionality, which must continue to continue to receive enhanced federal funding for operations. 

| **Reference Number** | **Outcome**          | **Recommended Metrics**                                      | **Regulatory Sources**  | **Minimum Reporting Periodicity** |
| -------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------: | :-------------------------------: |
| PDMP 1 Qualified PDMP   | Covered providers have near real-time access to:<Br> a. Information regarding Medicaid beneficiary’s prescription drug history.<Br> b. The number and type of controlled substances prescribed to and filled for the covered individual during at least the most recent 12-month period. <br> c. The name, location, and contact information (or other identifying number selected by the state, such as a national provider identifier issued by the CMS National Plan and Provider Enumeration System) of each covered provider who prescribed a controlled substance to the covered individual during at least the most recent 12-month period. | Real-time access: Average time (in mins) to access a report on bene prescription drug history | Section 1944(b) of the Act <br> Section 5042 – Medicaid PARTNERSHIP Act <Br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act |     Annually     |
| PDMP 2 Workflow Integration   | Providers can easily use the PDMP information though workflow integration, which may include electronic prescribing system for controlled substances. |  | Section 1944(b) of the Act <br> Section 5042 – Medicaid PARTNERSHIP Act <br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act |     Annually     |
| PDMP 3 Data-sharing Agreements   | The state has data-sharing agreements with all contiguous states to track patients, prescribers, and prescriptions across state lines. | Provide copies of data-sharing agreements entered with contiguous states | Section 1944(b) of the Act <br> Section 5042 – Medicaid PARTNERSHIP Act <br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act |     Annually     |
| PDMP 4 Medicaid Program Access to PDMP (if applicable)    | At the discretion of the state, a state’s Medicaid medical and pharmacy directors and any designee have access to the PDMP information in an electronic format based on data-sharing agreements in place (subject to state law).  | Provide a copy of the report of issues reported for designated users who could not or were denied access  | Section 1944(b) of the Act <br> Section 5042 – Medicaid PARTNERSHIP Act <br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act |     Annually     |
| PDMP 5 Required Reporting   | The state produces data for annual DUR Board reports that include: <br> a. Percentage of covered providers who checked the prescription drug history of a covered individual through a qualified PDMP before prescribing a controlled substance.<br> b. Aggregate trends such as- <br>· the quantity of daily morphine milligram equivalents prescribed for controlled substances.<br> · the number and quantity of daily morphine milligram equivalents prescribed for controlled substances per covered individual. <br>·    the types of controlled substances prescribed, including the dates of such prescriptions, the supplies authorized (including the duration of such supplies), and the period of validity of such prescriptions, in different populations. <br> c. Whether or not the state requires (and a detailed explanation as to why the state does or does not require) pharmacists to check the prescription drug history of a covered individual through a qualified PDMP before dispensing a controlled substance. <br> d. An accounting of any data or privacy breach of a qualified PDMP, the number of covered individuals impacted by each such breach, and a description of the steps the state has taken to address each such breach | - Quantity of daily morphine milligram equivalents prescribed for controlled substances. <br> - The number and quantity of daily morphine milligram equivalents prescribed for controlled substances per covered individual. <br> - Number of occurrences of data or privacy breaches of a qualified PDMP that includes the number of covered individuals impacted by each breach. | Section 1944(e) of the Act <Br> Section 5042 – Medicaid PARTNERSHIP Act <br> 42 CFR 433.112(b)(15) <br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act |     Annually     |
| PDMP 6 Utilization and Quality Reports   | The system produces transaction data, reports, and performance information that support program evaluation, continuous improvement in business operations, transparency, and accountability by reporting on: <br> a. Concurrent use of opioids and benzodiazepines <br> b. Use of opioids at high dosage in persons without cancer <br> c. Use of opioid from multiple providers in persons without cancer <br> d. Use of opioids at high dosage and from multiple providers in persons without cancer <br> The rate of events among individuals receiving prescription opioid medications captured via electronic case reporting that have evidence of opioid-related hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and/or urgent care visits, expressed as number of unique events per month | - Number of covered individuals concurrently prescribed opioids and benzodiazepines. <Br> - List of covered individuals who were prescribed opioids from multiple providers. <br> - Number and/or percentage of opioid-related hospitalizations, ER visits, urgent care visits for covered individuals.  | Section 1944 (e)(1) of the Act <br> Section 1927(g)(2)(B) and (g)(3)(D) of the Act <br> Section 1004 of the SUPPORT Act <br> 42 CFR 433.112(b)(15) <br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act <br> Centers for Disease Control |     Annually     |



---

### State-Specific Outcomes - CMS Approved

*State-Specific Outcomes* focus on improvements to the Medicaid program above and beyond baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes.*

States which are requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

*State-Specific Outcomes* should target specific problems and derive Medicaid program benefits. For more information on constructing and writing *good outcomes* see our page  "Writing-Outcome-Statements". 

In the table below, we provide a listing of State-Specific Outcomes that have been approved by CMS. Each row includes: 

* The state which created the outcome and metrics and the assocaited Medicaid program goal;
* The outcome statement;
* The assocaited metric(s) linked to the outcome statement, and; 
* The periodicity for reporting metric data to CMS. 

| **State**     | Medicaid Program Goal | Outcome Statement | **Metric(s)** | **Periodicity** |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| [placeholder] | [placeholder]         | [placeholder]     | [placeholder] | [placeholder]   |
| [placeholder] | [placeholder]         | [placeholder]     | [placeholder] | [placeholder]   |

Commit message:

Updating State Outcomes language across business area pages

Outcomes and Metrics/Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP)/readme.md, after:

# Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (PDMP)
#### How this system supports the Medicaid Program 

[intro text]

<div align="right">
  <a href="https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/NAretakis-Navigation-Flat/Outcomes%20and%20Metrics/Claims%20Processing/CMS-Required%20%26%20State%20Specific%20Outcomes.xlsx">Click here to download the outcomes in an Excel Workbook</a>  
</div>

---

## CMS-Required Outcomes

Each CMS-Required outcome is based on statutory or regulatory requirements. CMS-Required Outcomes and Metrics are used to demonstrate that a system is compliant with the applicable federal regulations which pertain to that a specific system or module. CMS-Required outcomes form the baseline for system/module functionality, which must continue to continue to receive enhanced federal funding for operations. 

| **Reference Number** | **Outcome**          | **Recommended Metrics**                                      | **Regulatory Sources**  | **Minimum Reporting Periodicity** |
| -------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------: | :-------------------------------: |
| PDMP 1 Qualified PDMP   | Covered providers have near real-time access to:<Br> a. Information regarding Medicaid beneficiary’s prescription drug history.<Br> b. The number and type of controlled substances prescribed to and filled for the covered individual during at least the most recent 12-month period. <br> c. The name, location, and contact information (or other identifying number selected by the state, such as a national provider identifier issued by the CMS National Plan and Provider Enumeration System) of each covered provider who prescribed a controlled substance to the covered individual during at least the most recent 12-month period. | Real-time access: Average time (in mins) to access a report on bene prescription drug history | Section 1944(b) of the Act <br> Section 5042 – Medicaid PARTNERSHIP Act <Br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act |     Annually     |
| PDMP 2 Workflow Integration   | Providers can easily use the PDMP information though workflow integration, which may include electronic prescribing system for controlled substances. |  | Section 1944(b) of the Act <br> Section 5042 – Medicaid PARTNERSHIP Act <br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act |     Annually     |
| PDMP 3 Data-sharing Agreements   | The state has data-sharing agreements with all contiguous states to track patients, prescribers, and prescriptions across state lines. | Provide copies of data-sharing agreements entered with contiguous states | Section 1944(b) of the Act <br> Section 5042 – Medicaid PARTNERSHIP Act <br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act |     Annually     |
| PDMP 4 Medicaid Program Access to PDMP (if applicable)    | At the discretion of the state, a state’s Medicaid medical and pharmacy directors and any designee have access to the PDMP information in an electronic format based on data-sharing agreements in place (subject to state law).  | Provide a copy of the report of issues reported for designated users who could not or were denied access  | Section 1944(b) of the Act <br> Section 5042 – Medicaid PARTNERSHIP Act <br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act |     Annually     |
| PDMP 5 Required Reporting   | The state produces data for annual DUR Board reports that include: <br> a. Percentage of covered providers who checked the prescription drug history of a covered individual through a qualified PDMP before prescribing a controlled substance.<br> b. Aggregate trends such as- <br>· the quantity of daily morphine milligram equivalents prescribed for controlled substances.<br> · the number and quantity of daily morphine milligram equivalents prescribed for controlled substances per covered individual. <br>·    the types of controlled substances prescribed, including the dates of such prescriptions, the supplies authorized (including the duration of such supplies), and the period of validity of such prescriptions, in different populations. <br> c. Whether or not the state requires (and a detailed explanation as to why the state does or does not require) pharmacists to check the prescription drug history of a covered individual through a qualified PDMP before dispensing a controlled substance. <br> d. An accounting of any data or privacy breach of a qualified PDMP, the number of covered individuals impacted by each such breach, and a description of the steps the state has taken to address each such breach | - Quantity of daily morphine milligram equivalents prescribed for controlled substances. <br> - The number and quantity of daily morphine milligram equivalents prescribed for controlled substances per covered individual. <br> - Number of occurrences of data or privacy breaches of a qualified PDMP that includes the number of covered individuals impacted by each breach. | Section 1944(e) of the Act <Br> Section 5042 – Medicaid PARTNERSHIP Act <br> 42 CFR 433.112(b)(15) <br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act |     Annually     |
| PDMP 6 Utilization and Quality Reports   | The system produces transaction data, reports, and performance information that support program evaluation, continuous improvement in business operations, transparency, and accountability by reporting on: <br> a. Concurrent use of opioids and benzodiazepines <br> b. Use of opioids at high dosage in persons without cancer <br> c. Use of opioid from multiple providers in persons without cancer <br> d. Use of opioids at high dosage and from multiple providers in persons without cancer <br> The rate of events among individuals receiving prescription opioid medications captured via electronic case reporting that have evidence of opioid-related hospitalizations, emergency department visits, and/or urgent care visits, expressed as number of unique events per month | - Number of covered individuals concurrently prescribed opioids and benzodiazepines. <Br> - List of covered individuals who were prescribed opioids from multiple providers. <br> - Number and/or percentage of opioid-related hospitalizations, ER visits, urgent care visits for covered individuals.  | Section 1944 (e)(1) of the Act <br> Section 1927(g)(2)(B) and (g)(3)(D) of the Act <br> Section 1004 of the SUPPORT Act <br> 42 CFR 433.112(b)(15) <br> CMS FAQs-SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act <br> Centers for Disease Control |     Annually     |



---

## State-Specific Outcomes - CMS Approved

States requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements and the baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes*, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

When state-specific outcomes statements, keep [these tips](https://cmsgov.github.io/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/writing-outcome-statemets) in mind. 

### Examples for Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs

We are actively gathering and evaluating outcomes statements crafted by states for this business area. 

If you have an example from your state for this business area that you'd like us to consider adding for this page, please send it to OutcomesRepoFeedback@hhs.cms.org.




| **State**     | Medicaid Program Goal | Outcome Statement | **Metric(s)** | **Periodicity** |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;| &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;| &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
