Outcomes and Metrics/Claims Processing/readme.md, before:

# Claims Processing 
#### How this system supports the Medicaid Program 

[intro text]

<div align="right">
  <a href="https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/NAretakis-Navigation-Flat/Outcomes%20and%20Metrics/Claims%20Processing/CMS-Required%20%26%20State%20Specific%20Outcomes.xlsx">Click here to download the outcomes in an Excel Workbook</a>  
</div>

---

### CMS-Required Outcomes

Each CMS-Required outcome is based on statutory or regulatory requirements. CMS-Required Outcomes and Metrics are used to demonstrate that a system is compliant with the applicable federal regulations which pertain to that a specific system or module. CMS-Required outcomes form the baseline for system/module functionality, which must continue to continue to receive enhanced federal funding for operations. 

| **Reference Number** | **Outcome**          | **Recommended Metrics**                                      | **Regulatory Sources**  | **Minimum Reporting Periodicity** |
| -------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------: | :-------------------------------: |
| <div align="center">CP1 Receipt and Ingestion   | The system receives, ingests, and retains claims, claims adjustments, and supporting documentation submitted both electronically and by paper in standard formats.  | - Count/percentage of claims received by submission channel (paper vs. electronic).<br><br>- Median processing time for ingestion of non-electronic claims/documentation (from receipt to correct ingestion of/association with the associated claims record). | 45 CFR 162.1102    | <div align="center">Annual|
| <div align="center">CP2 Validation   | The system performs comprehensive validation of claims and claims adjustments, including validity of services.  | Count/percentage of claims/claims adjustments accepted/suspended/rejected for processing.| 42 CFR 431.052<br>42 CFR 431.055<br>42 CFR 447.26<br>42 CFR 447.45(f)<br>45 CFR 162.1002<br>SMD Letter 10-017<br>SMM Part 11 Section 11300  | <div align="center">Annual             |
| <div align="center">CP3 Prior Authorization | The system confirms authorization for services that require prior approval to manage costs or ensure patient safety, and that the services provided are consistent with the authorization. The system accepts use of the authorization by multiple sequential providers during the period as allowed by state rules. Prior-authorization records stored by the system are correctly associated with the relevant claim(s). | Count/percentage of claims/claims adjustments requiring prior-authorization accepted/suspended/rejected for processing based on prior authorization or lack thereof.| SSA 1927(d)(5)<br>42 CFR 431.630<br>42 CFR 431.960<br>SMM Part 4<br>SMM Part 11 Section 11325 | <div align="center">Annual |
| <div align="center">CP4 Calculation and Resolution | The system correctly calculates payable amounts in accordance with the State Plan and logs accounts payable amounts for payment processing. The system accepts, adjusts, or denies claim line items and amounts and captures the applicable reason codes.| - Count/percentage of transactions by reason code.<br><br>- Count/percentage of transactions re-priced post-payment by underpayment/overpayment and, if applicable, reason code or other applicable categorization available to the State.| 42 CFR 431.052 | <div align="center">Annual   |
| <div align="center">CP5 Provide Submission Status | The state communicates claims status throughout the submission and payment processes and in response to inquiry. If there are correctable errors in a claims submission, the system suspends the claims, attaches pre-defined reason code(s) to suspended claims, and communicates those errors to the provider for correction. The system associates applicable error or reason code(s) for all statuses (e.g., rejected, suspended, denied, approved for payment, paid) and communicates those to the submitter. The system shows providers, case managers and members current submission status through one or more of the following:<br>- Automatic notices as appropriate based on claims decision or suspension.<br>- Explanation of Benefits (EOB).<br>- Providing prompt response to inquiries regarding the status of any claim through a variety of appropriate technologies, and tracking and monitoring responses to the inquiries.<br>- Application programming interface (API)| - Count/percentage of claims suspended for correction/corrected by reason code.<br><br>- Count/percentage of inquiries/responses/communications by submission/response channel.| 45 CFR Part 162.1402 (c)<br>45 CFR Part 162.1403 (a) & (b)<br>42 CFR 431.60 (a) & (b)<br>SMM Part 11 Section 11325 | <div align="center">Annual |
| <div align="center">CP6 Record-Keeping | The system tracks each claim throughout the adjudication process (including logging edits made to the claim) and retains transaction history to support claims processing, reporting, appeals, audits, and other uses. | - Records must be retained for a minimum of 3 years for fiscal records, 5 years for records related to cost reports, 6 years for medical records of covered entities, and 10 years for managed care records (or greater if required under State laws) – periods are measured from the date of closure of all related actions for a given record.<br><br>- Pass/Fail that the state can demonstrate that 100% of records were retained for the appropriate number of years indicated above. | 42 CFR 433.139   | <div align="center">Annually: This is an ongoing continuous activity. The State should conduct an annual assessment during annual reporting or sampling activities to verify that records are being properly retained in accordance with the State records schedule.|


---

### State-Specific Outcomes - CMS Approved

*State-Specific Outcomes* focus on improvements to the Medicaid program above and beyond baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes.*

States which are requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

*State-Specific Outcomes* should target specific problems and derive Medicaid program benefits. For more information on constructing and writing *good outcomes* see our page  "Writing-Outcome-Statements". 

In the table below, we provide a listing of State-Specific Outcomes that have been approved by CMS. Each row includes: 

* The state which created the outcome and metrics and the assocaited Medicaid program goal;
* The outcome statement;
* The assocaited metric(s) linked to the outcome statement, and; 
* The periodicity for reporting metric data to CMS. 

| **State**     | Medicaid Program Goal | Outcome Statement | **Metric(s)** | **Periodicity** |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| [placeholder] | [placeholder]         | [placeholder]     | [placeholder] | [placeholder]   |
| [placeholder] | [placeholder]         | [placeholder]     | [placeholder] | [placeholder]   |

Commit message:

Updating State Outcomes language across business area pages

Outcomes and Metrics/Claims Processing/readme.md, after:

# Claims Processing 
#### How this system supports the Medicaid Program 

[intro text]

<div align="right">
  <a href="https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/NAretakis-Navigation-Flat/Outcomes%20and%20Metrics/Claims%20Processing/CMS-Required%20%26%20State%20Specific%20Outcomes.xlsx">Click here to download the outcomes in an Excel Workbook</a>  
</div>

---

## CMS-Required Outcomes

Each CMS-Required outcome is based on statutory or regulatory requirements. CMS-Required Outcomes and Metrics are used to demonstrate that a system is compliant with the applicable federal regulations which pertain to that a specific system or module. CMS-Required outcomes form the baseline for system/module functionality, which must continue to continue to receive enhanced federal funding for operations. 

| **Reference Number** | **Outcome**          | **Recommended Metrics**                                      | **Regulatory Sources**  | **Minimum Reporting Periodicity** |
| -------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------: | :-------------------------------: |
| <div align="center">CP1 Receipt and Ingestion   | The system receives, ingests, and retains claims, claims adjustments, and supporting documentation submitted both electronically and by paper in standard formats.  | - Count/percentage of claims received by submission channel (paper vs. electronic).<br><br>- Median processing time for ingestion of non-electronic claims/documentation (from receipt to correct ingestion of/association with the associated claims record). | 45 CFR 162.1102    | <div align="center">Annual|
| <div align="center">CP2 Validation   | The system performs comprehensive validation of claims and claims adjustments, including validity of services.  | Count/percentage of claims/claims adjustments accepted/suspended/rejected for processing.| 42 CFR 431.052<br>42 CFR 431.055<br>42 CFR 447.26<br>42 CFR 447.45(f)<br>45 CFR 162.1002<br>SMD Letter 10-017<br>SMM Part 11 Section 11300  | <div align="center">Annual             |
| <div align="center">CP3 Prior Authorization | The system confirms authorization for services that require prior approval to manage costs or ensure patient safety, and that the services provided are consistent with the authorization. The system accepts use of the authorization by multiple sequential providers during the period as allowed by state rules. Prior-authorization records stored by the system are correctly associated with the relevant claim(s). | Count/percentage of claims/claims adjustments requiring prior-authorization accepted/suspended/rejected for processing based on prior authorization or lack thereof.| SSA 1927(d)(5)<br>42 CFR 431.630<br>42 CFR 431.960<br>SMM Part 4<br>SMM Part 11 Section 11325 | <div align="center">Annual |
| <div align="center">CP4 Calculation and Resolution | The system correctly calculates payable amounts in accordance with the State Plan and logs accounts payable amounts for payment processing. The system accepts, adjusts, or denies claim line items and amounts and captures the applicable reason codes.| - Count/percentage of transactions by reason code.<br><br>- Count/percentage of transactions re-priced post-payment by underpayment/overpayment and, if applicable, reason code or other applicable categorization available to the State.| 42 CFR 431.052 | <div align="center">Annual   |
| <div align="center">CP5 Provide Submission Status | The state communicates claims status throughout the submission and payment processes and in response to inquiry. If there are correctable errors in a claims submission, the system suspends the claims, attaches pre-defined reason code(s) to suspended claims, and communicates those errors to the provider for correction. The system associates applicable error or reason code(s) for all statuses (e.g., rejected, suspended, denied, approved for payment, paid) and communicates those to the submitter. The system shows providers, case managers and members current submission status through one or more of the following:<br>- Automatic notices as appropriate based on claims decision or suspension.<br>- Explanation of Benefits (EOB).<br>- Providing prompt response to inquiries regarding the status of any claim through a variety of appropriate technologies, and tracking and monitoring responses to the inquiries.<br>- Application programming interface (API)| - Count/percentage of claims suspended for correction/corrected by reason code.<br><br>- Count/percentage of inquiries/responses/communications by submission/response channel.| 45 CFR Part 162.1402 (c)<br>45 CFR Part 162.1403 (a) & (b)<br>42 CFR 431.60 (a) & (b)<br>SMM Part 11 Section 11325 | <div align="center">Annual |
| <div align="center">CP6 Record-Keeping | The system tracks each claim throughout the adjudication process (including logging edits made to the claim) and retains transaction history to support claims processing, reporting, appeals, audits, and other uses. | - Records must be retained for a minimum of 3 years for fiscal records, 5 years for records related to cost reports, 6 years for medical records of covered entities, and 10 years for managed care records (or greater if required under State laws) – periods are measured from the date of closure of all related actions for a given record.<br><br>- Pass/Fail that the state can demonstrate that 100% of records were retained for the appropriate number of years indicated above. | 42 CFR 433.139   | <div align="center">Annually: This is an ongoing continuous activity. The State should conduct an annual assessment during annual reporting or sampling activities to verify that records are being properly retained in accordance with the State records schedule.|


---

## State-Specific Outcomes - CMS Approved

States requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements and the baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes*, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

When state-specific outcomes statements, keep [these tips](https://cmsgov.github.io/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/writing-outcome-statemets) in mind. 

### Examples for Claims Processing

We are actively gathering and evaluating outcomes statements crafted by states for this business area. 

If you have an example from your state for this business area that you'd like us to consider adding for this page, please send it to OutcomesRepoFeedback@hhs.cms.org.




| **State**     | Medicaid Program Goal | Outcome Statement | **Metric(s)** | **Periodicity** |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;| &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;| &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
