Outcomes and Metrics/Asset Verification System/readme.md, before:

# Asset Verification System 
#### How this system supports the Medicaid Program 

[intro text]

<div align="right">
  <a href="https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/NAretakis-Navigation-Flat/Outcomes%20and%20Metrics/Claims%20Processing/CMS-Required%20%26%20State%20Specific%20Outcomes.xlsx">Click here to download the outcomes in an Excel Workbook</a>  
</div>

---

### CMS-Required Outcomes


None. There are no CMS-Required outcomes for an Asset Verification System.

As such, for an Asset Verification System to be certified states will need to create or reuse State-Specific Outcomes which target state-specific problems and derive Medicaid program benetis.

---

### State-Specific Outcomes - CMS Approved

*State-Specific Outcomes* focus on improvements to the Medicaid program above and beyond baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes.*

States which are requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

*State-Specific Outcomes* should target specific problems and derive Medicaid program benefits. For more information on constructing and writing *good outcomes* see our page  "Writing-Outcome-Statements". 

In the table below, we provide a listing of State-Specific Outcomes that have been approved by CMS. Each row includes: 

* The state which created the outcome and metrics and the assocaited Medicaid program goal;
* The outcome statement;
* The assocaited metric(s) linked to the outcome statement, and; 
* The periodicity for reporting metric data to CMS. 

| **State**     | Medicaid Program Goal | Outcome Statement | **Metric(s)** | **Periodicity** |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| [placeholder] | [placeholder]         | [placeholder]     | [placeholder] | [placeholder]   |
| [placeholder] | [placeholder]         | [placeholder]     | [placeholder] | [placeholder]   |

Commit message:

Updating State Outcomes language across business area pages

Outcomes and Metrics/Asset Verification System/readme.md, after:

# Asset Verification System 
#### How this system supports the Medicaid Program 

[intro text]

<div align="right">
  <a href="https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/NAretakis-Navigation-Flat/Outcomes%20and%20Metrics/Claims%20Processing/CMS-Required%20%26%20State%20Specific%20Outcomes.xlsx">Click here to download the outcomes in an Excel Workbook</a>  
</div>

---

## CMS-Required Outcomes


None. There are no CMS-Required outcomes for an Asset Verification System.

As such, for an Asset Verification System to be certified states will need to create or reuse State-Specific Outcomes which target state-specific problems and derive Medicaid program benetis.

---

## State-Specific Outcomes - CMS Approved

States requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements and the baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes*, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

When state-specific outcomes statements, keep [these tips](https://cmsgov.github.io/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/writing-outcome-statemets) in mind. 

### Examples for Asset Verification Systems

We are actively gathering and evaluating outcomes statements crafted by states for this business area. 

If you have an example from your state for this business area that you'd like us to consider adding for this page, please send it to OutcomesRepoFeedback@hhs.cms.org.




| **State**     | Medicaid Program Goal | Outcome Statement | **Metric(s)** | **Periodicity** |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;| &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;| &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
