Outcomes and Metrics/Electronic Visit Verification (EVV)/readme.md, before:

# Electronic Visit Verification (EVV)
#### How this system supports the Medicaid Program 

[intro text]

<div align="right">
  <a href="https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/NAretakis-Navigation-Flat/Outcomes%20and%20Metrics/Claims%20Processing/CMS-Required%20%26%20State%20Specific%20Outcomes.xlsx">Click here to download the outcomes in an Excel Workbook</a>  
</div>

---

### CMS-Required Outcomes

Each CMS-Required outcome is based on statutory or regulatory requirements. CMS-Required Outcomes and Metrics are used to demonstrate that a system is compliant with the applicable federal regulations which pertain to that a specific system or module. CMS-Required outcomes form the baseline for system/module functionality, which must continue to continue to receive enhanced federal funding for operations. 

| **Reference Number** | **Outcome**          | **Recommended Metrics**                                      | **Regulatory Sources**  | **Minimum Reporting Periodicity** |
| -------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------: | :-------------------------------: |
| [Reference Number]   | [Outcome statement]  | - [Recommended metric one, two, three, etc.]<br /><br />- [Recommended metric one, two, three, etc.] | [link to regulation(s)] |     [recommended periodicity]     |
| [Reference Number]   | [[Outcome statement] | - [Recommended metric one, two, three, etc.]<br /><br />- [Recommended metric one, two, three, etc.] | [link to regulation(s)] |     [recommended periodicity]     |

---

### State-Specific Outcomes - CMS Approved

*State-Specific Outcomes* focus on improvements to the Medicaid program above and beyond baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes.*

States which are requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

*State-Specific Outcomes* should target specific problems and derive Medicaid program benefits. For more information on constructing and writing *good outcomes* see our page  "Writing-Outcome-Statements". 

In the table below, we provide a listing of State-Specific Outcomes that have been approved by CMS. Each row includes: 

* The state which created the outcome and metrics and the assocaited Medicaid program goal;
* The outcome statement;
* The assocaited metric(s) linked to the outcome statement, and; 
* The periodicity for reporting metric data to CMS. 

| **State**     | Medicaid Program Goal | Outcome Statement | **Metric(s)** | **Periodicity** |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| [placeholder] | [placeholder]         | [placeholder]     | [placeholder] | [placeholder]   |
| [placeholder] | [placeholder]         | [placeholder]     | [placeholder] | [placeholder]   |

Commit message:

Updating State Outcomes language across business area pages

Outcomes and Metrics/Electronic Visit Verification (EVV)/readme.md, after:

# Electronic Visit Verification (EVV)
#### How this system supports the Medicaid Program 

[intro text]

<div align="right">
  <a href="https://github.com/CMSgov/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/raw/NAretakis-Navigation-Flat/Outcomes%20and%20Metrics/Claims%20Processing/CMS-Required%20%26%20State%20Specific%20Outcomes.xlsx">Click here to download the outcomes in an Excel Workbook</a>  
</div>

---

## CMS-Required Outcomes

Each CMS-Required outcome is based on statutory or regulatory requirements. CMS-Required Outcomes and Metrics are used to demonstrate that a system is compliant with the applicable federal regulations which pertain to that a specific system or module. CMS-Required outcomes form the baseline for system/module functionality, which must continue to continue to receive enhanced federal funding for operations. 

| **Reference Number** | **Outcome**          | **Recommended Metrics**                                      | **Regulatory Sources**  | **Minimum Reporting Periodicity** |
| -------------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | :---------------------: | :-------------------------------: |
| [Reference Number]   | [Outcome statement]  | - [Recommended metric one, two, three, etc.]<br /><br />- [Recommended metric one, two, three, etc.] | [link to regulation(s)] |     [recommended periodicity]     |
| [Reference Number]   | [[Outcome statement] | - [Recommended metric one, two, three, etc.]<br /><br />- [Recommended metric one, two, three, etc.] | [link to regulation(s)] |     [recommended periodicity]     |

---

## State-Specific Outcomes - CMS Approved

States requesting enhanced FFP for systems that fulfill *state-specific program needs,* beyond minimum legal requirements and the baseline of the *CMS-required outcomes*, should propose *State-Specific Outcomes* which address the proposed enhancements.

When state-specific outcomes statements, keep [these tips](https://cmsgov.github.io/CMCS-DSG-DSS-Certification/writing-outcome-statemets) in mind. 
### Examples for this Electronic Visit Verification

We are actively gathering and evaluating outcomes statements crafted by states for this business area. 

If you have an example from your state for this business area that you'd like us to consider adding for this page, please send it to OutcomesRepoFeedback@hhs.cms.org.




| **State**     | Medicaid Program Goal | Outcome Statement | **Metric(s)** | **Periodicity** |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;| &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;| &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
